Mentor: Julien Thomas MD, MPH, Emory Healthcare

Domain: Electronic Health Records

Descriptions: Among the many challenges involved in providing high quality healthcare in today’s healthcare system is the administrative obligations of a physician as well as the rapid manipulation of large amounts of data. We often spend hours on an inpatient service attempting to organize and assimilate this information in order to make decisions about providing appropriate care. An advantage of the Epic Electronic Medical Record is the ability to search through the medical record for a topic which can be helpful however there are limitations. 

I seek to create an application that both organizes only the data appropriate for a particular specialty based on chief complaints and also integrates clinical tools to save time and cognitive energy. For instance as a neurologist on the inpatient service at Grady we primarily care for strokes. Therefore it is important for me to be have the laboratory risk factors (Hemoglobin A1c, Cholesterol including LDL levels etc.) as well as the interpretation of certain procedures (transthoracic echocardiogram for ventricular function and patent foramen ovale etc.) as well as risk factors from the patients history (tobacco smoking history, parents’ history of stroke). Finally, whenever the data is available, having a calculated CHA2DS2-VASc score for making decisions about therapies would be helpful if presented.An application that could accomplish what was described above, preferably with the portability of FHIR would do wonders for improving efficiency and likely quality of care provided by physicians while also decreasing burn out. 

Additionally, it would help align the goals of physicians and hospital systems by providing a reason for physicians to pay more attention to the ICD codes that determine billing, if such codes were also being used to drive an application such as the one above- ie. a data summary or MedCard specific to certain diagnosis-related group or ICD code.

Additional Details: An example of a site that compiles many of the tools we use to make medical decisions. The proposed application would compile this data for each patient as appropriate automatically. Depending on the success of this project I would consider marketing this app to Hospital Systems, however it will be heavily driven from a clinical standpoint and requiring medical expertise so I do not predict significant issues with the code being open source. Because the inpatient neurology wards is split into 2 teams, it would be very easy to test an application such as this for clinical efficacy, ie. one would use the app while another could be a control, with a set cross over time. Following HIPAA regulations will clearly be very important in creating this application. https://www.mdcalc.com/  

Preferences: Frontend Developer, Backend Developer, Database Administrator, Data Scientist; Prefers Eastern Timezone; GoToMeeting/ WebEx/ Zoom; Most flexible Monday, Wednesday, and Thursday after 6pm and on the weekends however my schedule varies.

Mentor Comments: I have an example of a MedCard to share in my google drive for reference and can submit upon request. I'm very excited to work on this project together!